# Role of maturation and mortality in portfolio effects and climate resilience

This repository contains code and data for an age-structured, life cycle model of Sacramento River fall run Chinook salmon to examine age structure diversity (driven by either maturation or natural mortality) on portfolio effects and climate resilience.

## Abstract
The portfolio effect plays a critical role in population productivity and stability. Age structure of spawning salmon represents an example of portfolio effects such that the risks of experiencing unfavorable conditions are spread across time. However, the distribution of maturation ages for Pacific salmon (Oncorhynchus spp.) is increasingly concentrated into fewer and younger ages classes, which may impact population resilience to climate change. We explored the population dynamics of Sacramento River fall-run Chinook salmon (*O. tshawytscha*) under different age structure scenarios using a life-cycle model and explicitly compared two mechanisms that can underlie these changes – mortality and maturation. In addition, we tested whether age structure promotes resilience to drought. We found that high age structure diversity increased the stability of population size and harvest compared with low diversity. However, mean population size responded differently depending on the underlying mechanism. Reduced mortality of adult fish ages 4-5 increased escapement whereas delayed maturation decreased escapement. Overall, high age structure diversity was able to buffer against the adverse effects of droughts by reducing the variability of population size and harvest compared with low diversity, in some cases reducing the percentage of years with overfished status. Our results suggest that age structure diversity promotes population stability for salmon in an increasingly variable climate.
